Take the Global Superstore data set.

Add the columuns are Profit Margin, Cost columuns in the Superstore data set. 
Import the data set into the Power bi. 

Financial KPI Columns Added. 
Profit Margin 
Profit Margin = DIVIDE([Profit], [Sales])  

#It will fill all the columns without the below errors for the Caluculation=IFERROR(G2/F2,0)
Sales is in column F
Profit is in column G
You want Profit Margin in column H
Calculates Profit ÷ Sales
Avoids #DIV/0! errors
Is equivalent to Power BI’s DIVIDE()
Profit Margin was calculated in Excel using a dynamic formula with error handling to ensure accurate results even when sales values are zero. The formula was auto-filled across the dataset using Excel table functionality for scalability and consistency.

Cost (Optional but Powerful)
Cost = [Sales] - [Profit]

#Calculation Steps:
=IFERROR(S2 - V2, 0)
Sales = column S
Profit = column V
Cost was derived in Excel by subtracting Profit from Sales using a row-wise formula with error handling. The calculation was auto-filled across the dataset using Excel table functionality to maintain consistency and scalability.

KPI MEASURES Taken. 
Total Sales = SUM('Table'[Sales])
Total Profit = SUM('Table'[Profit])
Average Margin = AVERAGE('Table'[Profit Margin])
KPI measures such as Total Sales, Total Profit, and Profit Margin were calculated using a centralized fact table containing transactional data. Supporting dimension tables for date, product, and region were used to enable filtering and drill-down analysis, following a star schema design.

STEP 1: Import Dataset
Open Power BI Desktop
Home → Get Data → Excel / CSV
Load your dataset
Click Load

Make sure these columns exist:
Sales
Profit
Order Date

STEP 2: Create KPI MEASURES (IMPORTANT: Measures, not columns)
Go to Data view or Report view → Modeling → New measure
Total Sales (Measure) Total Sales = SUM('Fact_Sales'[Sales])
Total Profit (Measure) Total Profit = SUM('Fact_Sales'[Profit])
Profit Margin (Measure) Profit Margin = DIVIDE([Total Profit], [Total Sales], 0)

This:
Prevents divide-by-zero errors
Updates dynamically with slicers

STEP 3: Format the Measures (Very Important)
Total Sales
Format: Currency
Decimal places: 0 or 2
Total Profit
Format: Currency
Profit Margin
Format: Percentage
Decimal places: 1–2

STEP 4: Create KPI CARDS (Dashboard Top Section)
Go to Report View  - Insert Card visual
Card 1
Field: Total Sales
Title: Total Sales
Card 2
Field: Total Profit
Title: Total Profit
Card 3
Field: Profit Margin
Title: Profit Margin

KPI measures for Total Sales, Total Profit, and Profit Margin were created using DAX measures to ensure dynamic calculation. These KPIs were displayed using card visuals at the top of the dashboard, allowing real-time performance monitoring based on user-selected filters such as date, region, and category.

ADD TREND CHART: SALES OVER TIME
Choose the Right Visual
Go to Report View
Select Line chart from Visualizations
Line chart = best for time trends (never bar).

Add Fields (MOST IMPORTANT PART)
Axis (X-axis) Drag: Order Date
Use Date hierarchy Year, Quarter, Month FOR (best practice): Use Month-Year column (if created)

Values (Y-axis) Drag: Total Sales (Measure)

Fix Date Sorting (Very Common Issue)
If using Month-Year:
Select Month-Year column
Column tools → Sort by Column
Sort by Order Date or YearMonth number
This prevents Jan–Dec being scrambled.

Add Context (Optional but Strong)
Tooltips Add: Total Profit, Profit Margin. 
Now hovering shows quality of sales, not just quantity.

A line chart was used to visualize Total Sales over time, enabling trend and seasonality analysis. Date hierarchies allow drill-down from year to month, helping stakeholders understand sales growth patterns and performance fluctuations.

ADD CATEGORY BREAKDOWN (BAR CHART)
Choose the Right Visual
Go to Report View
Select Clustered bar chart
Bar (horizontal) is best for category comparison and long names.

Add Fields (Critical Setup)
Axis (Y-axis) Drag: Category 
Values (X-axis) Drag: Total Sales


This shows revenue contribution by category

Optional (Highly Recommended): Profit View
To deepen analysis, you can:
Add Total Profit to Values OR
Duplicate the chart and switch to Total Profit
Sales shows volume, Profit shows quality.

Sort for Insight (Very Important)
Click the chart
Three dots (⋯) → Sort by Total Sales
Sort → Descending

Top-performing categories appear first.
Format the Chart (Clean & Professional)
Data Labels On Display units: Auto
Axis Titles
X-axis: Total Sales
Y-axis: Category

Add Drill Capability (Optional but Impressive)
Enable Drill Down:
Category → Sub-Category
Allows users to explore deeper without cluttering the page.

Placement Tip (Layout)
Place below or beside Sales Trend
Keep consistent width with trend chart

A clustered bar chart was used to compare Total Sales across product categories, enabling quick identification of top-performing and underperforming segments. Sorting and drill-down features allow deeper analysis at the sub-category level.

OPTION 1: REGION PERFORMANCE — BAR CHART (RECOMMENDED)
This is exam-safe, accurate, and always works.
1️ Insert Visual
Report View → Clustered bar chart
2️ Add Fields
Axis (Y-axis) Region
Values (X-axis) Total Sales
(Optional) Add Total Profit to Values (for comparison)

3️. Sort for Insight
Three dots (⋯)
Sort by Total Sales
Descending
Top-performing regions appear first.

4. Format (Clean Look)
Data labels → On
Axis titles → On
Colors → Single neutral color

OPTION 2: REGION PERFORMANCE — MAP (VISUAL STORY)
Use this only if region data is clean.

1️ Insert Visual
Select Map (bubble map) or Filled Map

2️ Add Fields
Location
Region / State / Country
Size
Total Sales
Tooltip (Optional but powerful)
Total Profit
Profit Margin
Bubble size = sales volume

3️ Fix Map Issues (Important)
If map doesn’t show:
Select Region column
Column tools → Data category
Set to: Country / State / Region (as applicable)

Regional performance was analyzed using bar and map visuals to compare Total Sales across geographic areas. Bar charts provide precise comparison, while maps offer intuitive geographic insights, helping identify high-performing and underperforming regions.

ADD TOP 10 PRODUCTS TABLE
1️ Create the Required Measure (If Not Already)
Go to Modeling → New measure
Total Sales = SUM('Fact_Sales'[Sales])

2️ Insert the Table Visual
Report View → Table visual

3️ Add Fields to the Table
Drag these fields:
Columns
Product Name
Total Sales
Total Profit
Profit Margin
This shows both performance and quality of products.

4️ Filter to Top 10 Products (VERY IMPORTANT)
Method: Visual-Level Filter (Best)
Select the table
Go to Filters pane
Under Filters on this visual
Drag Product Name
Change filter type to Top N
Set:
Show items: Top 10
By value: Total Sales
Click Apply filter
Now the table always shows Top 10 by Sales

5️ Sort the Table
Click on Total Sales column
Sort → Descending
Top product appears first.

6️ Format the Table (Clean & Professional)
Column Formatting
Total Sales → Currency
Total Profit → Currency
Profit Margin → Percentage
Grid
Row padding → Medium
Grid lines → Off (clean look)

7️ Optional (Advanced but Impressive)
Conditional Formatting
Profit Margin → Color scale
Red = Low
Green = High
Data Bars
Total Sales → Data bars
Makes top performers visually pop.

A Top 10 Products table was created using a visual-level Top N filter based on Total Sales. The table displays sales, profit, and profit margin, enabling identification of high-performing and high-margin products.

Top 10 Products – High Profit Contributors
Findings:

Zebra zm400 label printer, Zebra GX4290 thermal printer, Xerox multifunction printer, Xiamoi, Zebra GK4290 thermal printer
printout recycle, printout paper, note card, message books, parchmaent paper.  

The Top 10 products contribute a significant portion of total sales and profit, indicating revenue concentration.
These products show strong profit margins, making them key business drivers.
Some high-selling products generate lower margins, highlighting pricing or cost challenges.

ADD SLICERS IN POWER BI (REGION • YEAR • CATEGORY)
1️ Add Region Slicer
Steps:
Go to Report View
From Visualizations pane, select Slicer
Drag Region → Field
Format (Recommended):
Slicer type → Dropdown
Title → On
Title text → Region
Single select → Off (allow multi-select)
Use when users want to filter by geography.

2️ Add Year Slicer
Best Practice: Use Year column (not full date)
Steps:
Insert another Slicer
Drag Order Date → Field
Click dropdown on the slicer → choose Year (or drag Year column if you created one)

Format:
Slicer type → Horizontal
Title → Year
This avoids confusing date ranges and improves usability.

3️ Add Category Slicer
Steps:
Insert a Slicer
Drag Category → Field

Format:
Slicer type → List or Dropdown
Title → Category
Multi-select → On
Useful to analyze category-wise performance instantly.

4️ Arrange Slicers (Layout Tip)
Best layout:
[ Region ]   [ Year ]   [ Category ]

Steps:
Select all slicers (Ctrl + Click)
Format → Align → Top
Format → Distribute horizontally
Keeps dashboard clean and professional.

5️ Ensure Slicers Affect All Visuals
Check interactions:
Select a slicer
Go to Format → Edit interactions
Ensure Filter icon is active on all visuals
Turn off filter only if needed

6️ Optional Enhancements (Recommended)
Sync slicers (if multiple pages):
View → Sync slicers
Sync Region/Year across pages
Clear selection button:
Add a button → Action → Clear filters


Interactive slicers for Region, Year, and Category were added to allow dynamic filtering of KPIs and visuals. This enables users to explore sales performance across different dimensions and supports data-driven decision-making.

Category Performance Analysis
Findings:
Technology category generates the highest sales and profit margins, making it the most valuable category.
Office Supplies show stable sales with moderate profitability.
Furniture category, while generating significant revenue, shows lower profit margins, indicating higher costs or discounting.
Insight: High sales do not always translate into high profit. Margin analysis is critical for decision-making.

A dedicated insights section was added to summarize key business findings derived from KPI cards and visuals. This helps stakeholders quickly understand trends, category performance, and revenue concentration without interpreting individual charts.

Key Business Findings (Summary)
Sales have increased consistently over the years, indicating strong business growth.
Technology products are the most profitable, while Furniture requires cost optimization.
Revenue and profit are concentrated among a small group of top-performing products.
Regional performance varies significantly, requiring customized strategies.

Recommendations to Improve Sales & Profitability
To Increase Sales:
Focus marketing and promotional efforts on high-performing regions.
Expand availability and promotion of top-selling and high-margin products.
Improve presence in underperforming regions through targeted campaigns.

To Improve Profitability:
Optimize pricing and reduce costs in low-margin categories such as Furniture.
Limit excessive discounting on products with low profit margins.
Encourage cross-selling of high-margin products.

Strategic Improvements:
Diversify product portfolio to reduce dependency on a few top products.
Use seasonal trends to plan inventory and promotions effectively.
Monitor KPIs regularly using the dashboard for proactive decision-making.

9. Conclusion
The BI dashboard successfully transforms raw sales data into actionable insights through KPI tracking, trend analysis, and product-level profitability evaluation. By focusing on high-margin categories, strengthening regional strategies, and optimizing low-performing segments, the organization can achieve sustainable sales growth and improved profitability.

